Those two I would consider guidebooks. For a book
that I would identify as a narrative, that is, it's
largely print with only a few illustrations,
what are among the most successful and impressed
books of that sort?
I think the most successful ones are the most part
are in our military history series okay and
there's a good market and good demand for military
history books and among those i think a dark and
bloody ground by ed miller and doomed at the start
by bill barch are two of the best sellers in
military history And they probably sold around
3,000 to 4,000 copies somewhere. Now what about
the Centennial History of A&M and the updated, how
did they do? The Pictorial History or the
two-volume Centennial History? Well, both of
them. How did the two of them do? Well, the
Centennial History, I think, really sold very few
copies. I think a lot of those were free copies to
administration and alumni.
The pictorial history did fairly well. I think the
first edition, I believe, just off the top of my
head, sold about 16,000 copies. And now we have the
second edition, and I really don't know how it's
done. I haven't checked those numbers in a long
time. And the band book did well, didn't it? Well,
it did well enough to justify its publication,
although we were somewhat disappointed in that.
We thought that every person who had ever been a
member of the band and then a lot of the Corps people
would want a copy of that book, but it didn't work
out that way. Can you think of any that you or other
members of the staff know, books that we might have
done that got away that somebody else did that
turned out to be? Oh, yeah, sure. I try to block
those, though. No, but could you give them? If
they're really good books, you know, I hate to see
them go. But can you give an example of one that we
might have done if we'd wanted to, but we I can't
think of anything specifically right at the
moment. I'll think for a second.
I was thinking of the fish that got away. Yeah.
Nothing that was really
tremendous national literary interest that I
would kick myself around the block if I lost, but
there have been some books that I wish we had done
that for one reason or another went to another
press. I
want to ask you some questions about being the
editor now of a manuscript. A manuscript comes in
And do you do any background preparation before
you start editing that manuscript? Well... On the
author or the topic? Well, um... It depends on what
you mean by editing. At which stage? At the copy
editing stage or acquisitions?
Take me through the whole process. Okay, the first
thing we get is a letter from the author suggesting
that the author has this wonderful manuscript
that he wants us to publish. And we ask for a full
proposal with the description of the book and the
sample chapters and so on. And we take a look at
that. And if that looks like something that we
could or should do, then we'll ask to see the
manuscript at that stage. One of the problems with
editing these days is that we're publishing so
many books that it's almost impossible for the
editor to read every one of the manuscripts that
comes in. I'd love to if I had the time, but I just
can't physically do it. So what we usually do is
skim through as much of the manuscript as we can and
see if it's well written. You can usually get a
sense of the quality of the style.
But we don't check technical details as to the
author's research, the quality of the research at
that point. If it looks feasible, we'll send it out
for review to specialists. Do you normally get,
for an author that's unknown to the press, do you
normally get a chapter to look at first or the whole
manuscript? We ask for samples first. If it's
somebody we don't know, definitely we ask for a
letter of proposal with sample chapters and an
outline, a synopsis of the chapters. In general,
about what percentage of those a chapter will lead
you all to encourage them to later send the whole
manuscript? One out of three? One out of three or
four. Then you get the whole manuscript, send it
out to how many readers? We have to have at least two
readers. If both those readers' reports are
positive, We don't need to go to a third reader. But
if there's
some controversy, conflict between the reader's
reports, or if one of them is negative, then we may
or may not go to a third reader. Is that standard
industry-wide? Yes, it is. And then if the
reader's reports are positive, then we'll
present the manuscript with our recommendation
and the reports and the author's response to the
reports to the faculty committee. And it's their
decision whether we should publish the book or
not. But if we presented it to them right, if the
reports are good, and if it obviously is a fit for
our list, then they'll approve it generally. Can
you think in your 25 years of experience here of any
time when you all went contrary to the preliminary
reader's report being negative and you all
continued? Can you think of one that worked out
well? Oh yes, we do that all the time. Is that right?
Oh yeah. Many times you'll get a negative reader's
report from one reader and you know that either
that reader
missed something in the manuscript, or over-read
something, misconstrued information, or maybe
even has a personal lax to grind. And so you go ahead
and get the second report.
Really, only I'd say 25% of the time, maybe even
less, do I reject a manuscript on the basis of the
first reader's report. I usually In most cases,
I'll go ahead and get the second report before I'll
send the manuscript back.
Many times, when I do get a negative report
initially like that, I'll go back and look at the
manuscript myself. And if I disagree with the
report especially, then I'll get a second report.
Now you take then the reader's reports and your
evaluation. And the author's responses to them.
Right. You take that to the press committee.
Right. And what is the official title we give to
the? It's the Texas A&M University Press Faculty
Advisory Committee. And how important is that
group? Well, they are the group that decides on
what is issued, what is published under the
imprint of the press. So they are the editorial
final deciders.
It's their job to evaluate and debate the good and
bad points brought out by the readers and to decide
if we should publish the book or not. How important
has that committee been in the years here?
part of the press, really. We have a large
committee compared to other university presses,
but we've always had people on the committee who,
for the most part, were very interested in what we
were doing, very interested in publishing. And so
they've always taking a strong interest in making
good decisions. As you recall your 25 years here,
who are some people on those committees that you
would want to single out for appreciation?
Well, you for one. You were the first chairman of
the committee. Thank you. And
some of the people on that, on the first committee,
I didn't know very well because I wasn't working
directly with them in that period, I know that
I can't remember some of the people. I couldn't
name all the people on the committee at that time.
And perhaps you could, but I don't remember them
all. I really didn't get involved with the
committee until after you had gone on to El Paso.
And Clint Phillips then became the chairman, and
really worked more closely with the committee
under Clint's term. And then more recently,
Gentry Steele. All right, and Gentry's been the
chairman about how long?
Six, seven years, I think. I think it was about six
years. And Clint were both deans of faculty.
Right. Was there any reason why that was changed as
far as you know? We had a change of the dean of
faculty about the time that Tom Rotell started
here. And I think that it was felt that it It would be
easier for us to work with somebody who had already
been on the committee and knew the operations on
the committee. Because Bill Perry had not. And the
new dean of faculty coming in, I think, was someone
completely new, had never been on the committee or
worked with him before. Bill Perry was a professor
of math. Right. And Tom, it was set up that Tom and
the press would report to Bill Perry. And so I think
it was Bill's decision to put someone on as the
committee chairman rather than himself. All
right, as far as you know, the press in reality down
through the years has reported to whom
administratively? Well, initially it reported
directly to the president. Frank Wardlaw went
straight to Jack Williams. and then to Jarvis
Miller, and then it was transferred to Frank
Hubert, and then it went back to reporting
directly to the President under Frank Vandiver.
And then at some point, I think under Rick Studer in
the early 90s,
the President then... Bill Mobley? Mobley, Bill
Mobley. decided to
to transfer it to another office because he didn't
have the time for the personal contact. And I think
that on paper it was the provost, but in fact the
dean of faculties. Well, it went to Dean Gage, and I
think he was the provost. I know Rick worked
directly with Dean for a while, and then I think
that then perhaps when Mary Miller came in, it went
on to the dean of faculty. As far as you at the
working level were aware, Did the administration
respond appropriately when the press needed a
response?
That is, did y'all ever, were y'all ever like, gee,
we never get a response, we made a request? Did it
seem that the- Well, yeah, I think there were some
times when we would would prepare a report or a
white paper or something and not hear from the
administration. There was a scare during Rick's
tour when we were in Austin for a Western
University presses meeting, regional meeting of
the association, and Rick got a message that he
should get back to College Station immediately to
justify the university's appropriation to the
press. So there were times when we felt that we were
not
getting full attention or our message wasn't
getting across to the administration. Alright,
while we're on this side road about away from
editing, were you at the working level aware ever
of a regent or a politician or a former student ever
trying to interfere in a press decision? Yes. Can
you give any examples? There was a fellow from
South Texas, I think he was an engineer, a retired
Aggie, who had written some books and had
contacted me and in fact had sent me a manuscript or
two that I had reviewed.
He had sent back to him and told him that it really
wasn't the kind of manuscript we were looking for
and the quality we were looking for. And although
it was on a good topic, one of them was on the great
wrenches of the American West. Tremendous topic,
would have been an excellent book, but we felt that
he just hadn't put it together well enough. And
so... went for a few months and then we got a letter
from the president's office saying who is this
this fellow and why is he so upset that the
university press hasn't published his book and
they sent a copy of his letter and it was in effect
what kind of idiots do you have working over there
they they don't support the former students and we
We support the university, and we don't get
anything back, and they don't want to publish this
good material by a former student. And we did get
the president's support on that, and he stood by us
and said, well, you know, the university press has
to make these hard decisions, and they decided
against your project, and I'm sorry, and that's
that. But that wasn't that. this fellow wrote the
president again and said, well, if that's the
case, you're not getting any of my money.
Apparently, he cut the university off because
there must have been some money involved that he
was planning to give the university. Were you, by
chance, the editor of Clady Williams' father's
book? No, I didn't work with that directly. But I
was here, of course, when it was published. Do you
remember all that story? A little bit. I knew sort
of what was going on with that.
We wanted to publish it. We knew it was important to
the press that we publish it, and fortunately we
were able to get Ernest Wallace to edit the book and
get it into a shape that it was publishable, and it
turned out to be a very good book. It was a good deal.
Frank Wardlow, I think, deserves a good deal of
that credit, doesn't he, for being able to work
that alone? Yeah, I think Lloyd Lyman was mainly
the person who is directly involved in
negotiating that. All right, back to the work of
editing a manuscript. Then you get the manuscript
now ready for you to edit it. You mean after the
committee's approved it for publication? Yes,
yes. Well, generally, if the author has responded
to the readers' reports and made any revisions
that the readers suggest, anything that comes up
in the discussion of the committee and anything
that we see as editors that we see needs to be done to
it if the author does all that then we'll go ahead
with it at that point so there's really no more
editing that we do at that point and we turn it over
to copy editing And then let the copy editors worry
about polishing it up. All right. Describe then
what I, let's see, what phrase should I use for this
first editing? Just editing? Well, it's
developmental editing. It's, like I say, not much
editing involved, really. It's just working with
the authors and the readers and getting the author
to make revisions that the readers recommend from
their
point of view as specialists in the field and
knowledgeable people. Right, and the editor at
that point does not read other books on the same
topic to see if this person, this manuscript,
makes sense or anything? That is, does this
manuscript stand on its own feet? Is that right?
Yeah, generally the readers are familiar with the
literature in that particular. Oh, no, no, I was
meaning you as the. Oh, the editor? No. Okay. No,
not necessarily. It's generally in one of the
topic areas that we cover in our acquisitions.
I cover military history and natural history and
Eastern European studies and
environmental books and natural history books.
And Mary Lynn covers Texas history, Western
history, political science and presidential
studies and Mexican-American studies and so on.
So we divide up the chores that way. But we don't go
out and try to educate ourselves in military
history other than just the normal reading that
we've done over the years. All right. Now, at
first, you did that early reading of that early
manuscript. Then you also did the copy editing.
When I first came to work here, I only did copy
editing. Oh, all right, okay. Right, but then you
move on up. Yeah, for a while there, I was doing
everything. All right, now the copy editor. Mary
Lynn was, too. And the copy editor, what does the
copy editor look for? Everything? Yeah,
you look for everything from punctuation
mistakes to the style of presentation and whether
the book is going to be the language of the book, the
style of the book is going to be understandable to
the market at which it's aimed.
Copy editing is an important job, and I'll always
respect the people who do it, because it takes a
special person to be able to focus on them. on a book
like that. And the copy editor doesn't have to be a
specialist in the field that he or she is working
with. I edited many manuscripts in my time that I
had no idea what they were talking about,
technically. I mean, a book in
French foreign policy, for example, I knew who de
Gaulle was, and that was about it. But I could get
into the book, and if the author said something
that didn't make sense, I at least knew to query it
and ask the author, do you really mean this? It's
misleading to me, a layperson. Will it be clear to
other readers? And I think that's the most
important thing a copy editor can add to a book is to
be able to recognize where other readers might
stumble. And you used a blue pencil until about
when? About 87, 88. Well, no, it was actually later
than that. We started using computers here about
87. Before that, of course, we used them in the
business office, but then the editorial and
marketing offices and design and production, we
began using computers in the late 80s. And then we
really began starting to get
manuscripts on disk in the early 90s, say seven or
eight years ago. And of course now practically
every manuscript we get is on disk. Are there still
some that come in? in the old-fashioned way. Very,
very rarely. And usually you can spot those in the
proposal material that they send. If it's still
typewritten, it's someone who either has an old
manuscript that they've dragged out of the closet
or someone who doesn't know how to use a computer.
And in a case like that, you wonder if they are
up-to-date enough to to have a manuscript that's
worthwhile. There are some people who are.
What's his name? Skutch, the ornithologist and
natural history man.
I can't think of his first name. S-K-U-T-C-H,
Skutch? Right, Skutch. He lives in Costa Rica, and
he's very elderly, but he keeps putting out
wonderful books on bird life. And we published two
of his books, The Minds of Birds, and Trogon's
Falcons, and another
bird. And he still types everything out on a
typewriter. He lives in Costa Rica, way back in the
forest. And he pounds it out on typewriter. Now,
for him, he's published books with many different
publishers, and we feel honored and fortunate
when we get one of his manuscripts. So for him,
we're willing to have it transcribed to a
computer. As you look back over these 25 years, can
you remember one or more that from start to finish,
it was a joy to work with, where that one kind of
stood out? What would be some of your favorites?
I'll tell you one that has always stood out in my
mind is Lighthouses of Texas. This is one of the
paintings, one of the illustrations from that
book. And that book just clicked into place from
start to finish. I was at the Oklahoma Historical
Society meeting at their centennial meeting in
Guthrie, Oklahoma. And I was so happy to be there,
because that was my home state. And it was the
centennial meeting, 100th year after the big land
rush. And one of the speakers there was T. Lindsey
Baker, who I'd known for years, Texas historian.
He was speaking to them. And he and I got together,
and we decided to go have a drink one of the old
restored saloons in Guthrie, downtown Guthrie.
And we picked up Jim Steeley along the way. Jim
Steeley's with the Texas Historical Commission.
I'd known Jim for years, too. And we went to the
saloon, and we're sitting around talking, and I
asked Lindsey what he was working on. And he said,
well, I've been doing research on the lighthouses
of Texas. And I said, well, that's really
interesting because I've always wanted to
publish a book on the lighthouses of Texas. We
ought to discuss this more. And Jim Steele pipes up
and he says, well, it really is interesting
because the Texas Historical Commission has
grant money from the National Park Service to
publish a book on Texas lighthouses. So right
there at the table, we all three came up with the
project. Lindsey would write the text, and I would
help him put it together and get the
illustrations, and Jim would provide the
funding. And I came back to the office and was
walking through the halls and I saw Harold
Phoenix's painting, it's in the Wardlaw
collection here, his painting of an oil derrick. I
think it's hanging in the director's office right
now. And I thought, you know, that has exactly the
proportions of a lighthouse, the derrick
standing up there in the middle of an open field.
And so I called Harold and asked him if he would be
interested in doing these lighthouses. And he was
delighted. And he traveled to every site on the
Texas coast, whether the lighthouse was still
standing there or not. He was there in person, even
took the boat ride out to the old Sabine Pass
lighthouse site. And then he went through old
photographs did a lot of research before he did
these paintings, and they were a wonderful
addition to the book, beautiful things. Now, how
many of the originals did we end up with in the
press? Just this one. And what did he do, sell the
others? He sold the others, yes. Well, actually,
what happened was the Rockport Maritime Museum
wanted to host an autographing. And so the opening
for the book was there in Rockport at the museum.
And then they purchased all of the original
paintings except this one. And so they wanted this
one, and he said, well, I've already promised it to
the press for the Wardlaw collection. and so they
they commissioned him to paint a replacement for
it which is the same lighthouse just uh you know
it's a little bit different and so he said well
while he was doing that he just painted a whole new
series and sold those for his for himself a trivia
from my mandel rogers Is he still doing Texas art?
Yes, he's still working in Sweetwater, still
painting. Because there used to be a place in
downtown Lubbock upstairs of what I'd call a big
office supply place and when you were opening up
and say you're opening up a new office they've got
all the chairs and the tables and the desk
everything but also they had art and we used to stop
and some of his art would be there but the last few
times we haven't seen it there but he's still
active uh the last i heard he was i talked to someone
From Sweetwater, it's been less than a year ago. So
you'll be back out there. All right, back to
manuscripts. Can you think of a manuscript or so,
the wording, the written manuscript, that was
marvelous for its quality and lacked little need
of editing? Are there any you recall that were? oh,
I remember one, and that's one of those that got
away, too.